"Bollywood" is a portmanteau derived from Bombay (the former name of Mumbai) and "Hollywood", a shorthand reference for the
American film industry which is based in Hollywood, California.[17]

The term "Tollywood", for the Tollygunge-based cinema of West Bengal, predated "Bollywood".[18] It was used in a 1932 American Cinematographer
article by Wilford E. Deming, an American engineer who helped produce the first Indian sound picture.[18]

"Bollywood" was probably invented in Bombay-based film trade journals in the 1960s or 1970s, though the exact inventor varies by account.
Film journalist Bevinda Collaco claims she coined the term for the title of her column in Screen magazine.[21] Her column entitled "On the Bollywood Beat"
covered studio news and celebrity gossip.[21] Other sources state that lyricist, filmmaker and scholar Amit Khanna was its creator.
It is unknown if it was derived from "Hollywood" through "Tollywood", or was inspired directly by "Hollywood".

The term has been criticised by some film journalists and critics, who believe it implies that the industry is a poor cousin of Hollywood.[17][23]
Many noted Hindi film actors, directors prefer to call it Hindi cinema rather than Bollywood and advice others to mention it as 'Hindi cinema'.
In 2020, Sudhir Mishra dissociated himself from Bollywood term, Hansal Mehta echoed same sentiment, he said "Bollywood" is "very derogatory "
term for Hindi cinema, veteran director Shyam Benegal : "Bollywood is a term copied from Hollywood.
The Indian film industry is the largest in the world. Why should we take a terminology that belongs to the industry of some other country?",
Ketan Mehta always preferred calling it Hindi cinema, Anurag Basu said "Calling ourselves Bollywood is a feudal mindset, we have our own identity.
We are Indian cinema, where films are made in more than 15 languages...We should not degrade by calling ourselves Bollywood.
When I go to International film festivals, I feel ashamed when we are called Bollywood. There is Korean cinema, French cinema, Italian cinema
 why not Indian cinema?”[26] Noted South Indian director Mani Ratnam expressed that 'Hindi cinema should stop calling itself Bollywood